<p align="justify">
<b>CONSEQUENCES OF THE SPATIAL HETEROGENEITY OF THE EDUCATIONAL SUPPLY AND LACK OF INFORMATION IN A SCHOOL CHOICE SYSTEM</b><br>
<i>Master in Economics Thesis</i><br>
<br>
<strong>Author:</strong> Martín Domingo Sielfeld O'Ryan<br>
<strong>Advisor:</strong> Esteban Alejandro López Ochoa<br>
<strong>University:</strong> Adolfo Ibáñez<br>
<strong>Date:</strong> 07/20/2021<br>
<strong>Status:</strong> Approved<br>
<strong>Score:</strong> 7.0/7.0<br>
<br>
<strong>Observations:</strong><br></p>
 
1. <p align="justify"><i>Since the languae of the original document is spanish, this summay aims to describe the main results and discoveries of the master's research.</i></p>
 
2. <p align="justify"><i>Certain unresolved issues are recognized in the final document, which are being worked on. Mentioning those that are the most relevant to address: (i) how can other similar families influence the households school preferences?, (ii) consider including interactions by socioeconomic status in the model rather than stratifying the data (comparison between groups not well achieved), (iii) Do families consider euclidean distance, street distance, or travel time when comparing alternatives?.</i></p>

<p align="justify">
<strong>SUMMARY</strong><br>
<br>
The literature has pointed out that home-school distance is an attribute that discourages households to consider high quality alternatives that are distant from home when the apply for enrollment. This is a problem when the educational offer is heterogeneously distributed in space, leading to having a closer school offer that is dissimilar according to the household residence. Through a discrete choice model for estimating household’s preferences, this research studies the effect of the heterogeneous distribution of schools and the inability of households to compare the entire offer on the conformation of lists of preferred alternatives for households in Santiago de Chile. The methodology used allows to estimate for each household the utility level reported by different schools with different attributes. Comparing the school that maximize the utility level for each household with that reported as most preferred in the application system, it is possible to evaluate if households are comparing optimally or are missing relevant alternatives due to lack of information. Simulations are also carried out to: contrast the existence of educational poles or deserts; contrast the distribution of attribute values by simulating the allocation process, among others. The main findings suggest that households are not able to choose optimally, which results in selecting schools that would not maximize their utility level. Given the spatial heterogeneity of the educational offer and the preferences for school attributes, communes with high (poles) and low (deserts) demand are observed. When comparing a simulation of the admission process where households can compare the entire offer with the results of the actual admission system, a significant decrease in the distance to be covered by students is observed, as also a reduction in the gap of education quality accessed by students from different socioeconomic level.<br> 
<br>
<strong>1.0 INTRODUCTION</strong><br>
<br>
The School Choice system proposed by Friedman (1962) allows parents to choose among schools according to their preferences for school characteristics. Previous research (Hofflinger, 2020; Burgess et al., 2015; Hastings et al., 2009) has indicated that this decision depends, among other things, on the comparison of different school attributes: good teaching, the educational curriculum (religious or differential education, for example), the cost of access (tuition or monthly payment), among others. However, for households the lack of information on some alternatives, the residence location and the home-school distance can affect the preferences and the real accessible offer.<br>
<br>
These indications would pose a problem in educational markets where the value of school attributes and the level of information is heterogeneous in space, shaping access to a different educational offer depending on the place of residence. Therefore, it is relevant to study the consequences of the spatial heterogeneity in the access to educational offer, the conformation of the list of preferences, their associated utility levels and the attributes that determine them.<br>
<br>
As a contribution to the literature, this research studies how the place of residence and the omission of relevant alternatives can lead to a non-optimal selection of schools (according to the utility maximization criteria). The approach used allows to contrast, for each household, the estimated utility, and the values of the school attributes between the schools reported as preferred (in the admission process) and those they may have chosen in a context of complete information. If significant differences are found, these could show the effects of the lack of information in a School Choice system. Through extensions of the methodology, it is also possible to determine areas of high (poles) and low (deserts) demand, analyzing the average level of their school attributes. This would reveal those areas that lack of a good educational offer, conditioning households that live there to an unfavorable offer. Finally, by simulating the admission process for the case of households with complete information, it is possible to contrast the results of the distribution of school attributes with respect to those observed in the national admission system. By analyzing the changes, it may be possible to see social gains of delivering more information to households, so that they can choose optimally.<br>
<br>
To analyze the school characteristics that families find more relevant, this research will follow the literature of the "Random Utility Model" (McFadden, 1977). The empirical approach will be through a Conditional Logit of the first preference submitted by those households that applied for grades between pre-kindergarten and first grade in the city of Santiago in 2019. In order to study the hypothesis of heterogeneous preferences for school attributes, the model is also stratified according to the household socioeconomic level.<br>
<br>
The main findings regarding preferences confirm what is suggested by the previous literature, where attributes of schools such as home-school distance, monetary payments and high low-income students’ composition are undesirable by households. On the other hand, high levels of academic quality and religious teaching are positively valued by applicants. Given these preferences, and under the assumption that the model allows for the comparison of all alternatives (complete information), there are municipalities in the city that have an offer with undesirable attributes, while others have an offer with highly desirable attributes. This spatial heterogeneity of preferred schools represents a problem when distance is a barrier for accessing schools with better attributes, since it causes households with an undesirable nearby offer to see their possibility of opting for better alternatives outside their neighborhood reduced. Finally, by simulating the admission process under complete information, certain efficiency gains are observed when families are able to compare more alternatives, such as an average reduction of 48% in the distance traveled and a reduction in the SIMCE score gap between priority and non-priority students of 5 points (approximately).<br>
<br>
 <strong>2.0 THE CHILEAN EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM</strong><br>
<br>
It is prudent to introduce the influence of the School Choice model in the Chilean educational system. Over 40 years, it underwent two profound reforms focused on giving households greater choice power over their child’s education. The first reform, applied in the early 1980s, introduced the model through a voucher system in subsidized public founded schools (Gauri, 1999). This idea proposed to hand over decision-making power to households through a per-pupil attendance subsidy to schools (Friedman M., 1962). Families would apply to those schools that best fit their preferences, where a fundamental assumption was that households were utility maximizers. The goal of this model was for schools to compete for students through educational plans that were attractive to households, such as good teaching and learning, the educational curriculum, and low monetary costs. This would incentivize lower performing schools to improve the education quality or close.<br>
<br>
However, the literature has revealed multiple problems related to the model application. For example, the introduction of vouchers in the educational system may have had ambiguous effects, since there is insufficient evidence to affirm that it led to an improvement in the quality of public education (McEwan & Carnoy, 2000; Bronfman, 2007; McEwan, Urquiola, & Vegas, 2008). Another relevant problem was the growth on the selection power of schools with good academic performance, due to the excess demand for them. Between 1980 and 2015 schools were able (to some extent) select applicants. Through admissions tests, interviews, request for evidence of household income, or other signaling strategies, schools avoided students that could lower the school's academic performance. This power allowed them to select those students who could perform better in academic tests, which was strongly related to the student's socioeconomic level. Because of this, the socioeconomic distribution of students between schools evolved to one in which most of the high-income students attended to those schools with better educational quality, while more vulnerable students were enrolled in those with deficient quality.<br>
<br>
The second reform was implemented four decades later (2015). This reform included the creation of a new School Admission System (“Sistema de Admisión Escolar” or SAE), which aimed to eliminate the selection power of public schools. By delegating the student selection task to a computerized system with random components, selection and discrimination problems were avoided while maintaining the school choice system. Currently, families no longer need to apply in person to schools, but rather the process of selection and admission of establishments is done through a website that allows households to create a list of preferred schools (ranked). It should be mentioned that the selection of alternatives does not have restrictions in terms of application or distance to travel limits. Also, the Ministry of Education established categories of preferences during the admission process, such as giving preference to a certain number of low-income students. Together with the number of vacancies per school, the state's priority ranking, and the household's list of preferred schools determine the distribution of students among schools.<br>
<br>
Despite the specifications of the new admission system, recent evidence suggests that there was no significant change in the socioeconomic composition of schools within the first 5 years of operation. This situation could be due to high co-payment in schools with higher educational quality, being a barrier for low-income families (Sillard, Garay, & Troncoso, 2018). Another article states that this result is due to the minimum proportion (15%) of low-income students per school (Eyzaguirre, Hernando, Razmilic & Blanco, 2019). The researchers suggest that expanding it to 20% in the best performing schools could reduce access inequality to better education quality. They also point out that the lack of information on the admission mechanism and the available alternatives can condition the speed at which these changes occur in socioeconomic compositions.<br>
<br>
Although these researchers suggest multiple reasons that could explain the observed results, they also indicate that part of the effect may be due to household’s preferences for school characteristics, the difficulty of comparing all alternatives and school’s capacity restrictions. They suggest that the differences in information and close alternatives may lead to an unfavorable equilibrium state (in terms of utility maximization) for low-income families. Neilson, Allende & Gallego (2019) may corroborate this idea by pointing out that families from low-socioeconomic background who participated in an intervention (where they were helped to choose in a more informed way) were substantially benefited. On average, these households could have access to better quality schools, with these results being slightly reduced due to the school’s capacity constraints.<br>
<br>
<strong>3.0 DATA</strong><br>
<br>
</p>
